**They are a complex weave of abilities that help you get someone's point, generate reasons for your own point, evaluate the reasons given by others, decide what or what not to do, decide what information to accept or reject, explain a complicated idea, apply conscious quality control as you think, and resist propaganda. Your most important critical thinking skill is your skill at making judgments─not snap judgments that occur in the blink of an eye, but those that require careful reasoning.
You are not reasoning logically if, when you want a gorilla suit for a Halloween party, the first thing you do is search for the word "Gorilla" in the telephone book, and the problem here is not that you used a telephone book instead of the Internet.
High-quality reasoning is called logical reasoning or critical thinking. Logical reasoning skills can be learned and improved. It is not a case of "Either you're naturally good at it or you’re not." Rather, nearly everyone is capable of reasoning well, and everyone is capable of improvement. The opposite of logical reasoning is uncritical thinking, examples of which are fuzzy thinking, believing what somebody says simply because they raise their voice, and narrowly thinking about a problem without bringing in the most relevant information.
This first chapter explains what it means to be logical—to reason logically or critically. It demonstrates the usefulness of logical reasoning as a means of making more effective decisions about your own life—decisions about what to believe and decisions about what to do. The chapter begins a systematic program of study of all the major topics regarding logical reasoning. Along the way, the book focuses on developing the following five skills: (1) writing logically, (2) detecting inconsistency and lack of clarity in a group of sentences, (3) spotting issues and arguments, (4) detecting and avoiding fallacies (reasoning errors), and (5) generating and im- proving arguments and explanations. These skills will be taught here independent of subject matter. This book is not about what you ought to believe about some subject such as politics, religion, sports or business.


#####2


**Although many scientific studies of decision-making have shown that people tend to sift sources of information looking to reinforce existing views rather than to accept the view that is backed up with the better argument, your book is designed to combat this tendency.
Facing a Decision as a Critical Thinker
Imagine this situation. You are on a four-day backpacking trip in a national wilderness area with your friends Juanita and Emilio. The summer weather's great, the scenery is exotic, and you've been having a good time. Yesterday you drove several hours into the area and parked in the main parking lot. Then you hiked four hours to your present campsite. The three of you carried all your food, water, sleeping bags, and tents.
Last night you discovered that somebody had accidentally cracked the large water container. Now you are stuck with no water. Although there is a stream nearby, you wouldn’t normally drink from a stream, and you remember that your packets of water-sterilization tablets are in the pocket of your other coat—the one you left at home at the last minute. The three of you are thirsty and have only dehydrated food left, except for four apples. You wish you had bothered to haul in that twelve-pack of Dr. Pepper you decided to leave in the car’s trunk.



#####3



What do you do? Nobody brought cell phones. You could yell, but that is unlikely to help; you haven't seen any other hikers since the trip began. You try yelling, but all you get is an echo. You briefly think about snow, but you realize there isn't any. Emilio says he has an idea: Boil the water from the stream. When it cools, you could drink it and make breakfast and continue with your good times. Then Juanita mentions seeing a sign back in the parking lot:
"Giardia is a microorganism that makes you sick," she says. You and Emilio have never heard of it. Emilio says he's willing to bet that boiling the water will kill the critters. "Besides," he says, "our stream might not have Giardia. I'll take the first drink." Juanita winces. "No, don’t do that," she says. "Let's just pack up and go home." When you ask her why, she explains that a friend of hers got Giardia and had a bad experience with it. She doesn't want to risk having the same experience. When you hear the details, you understand why. The symptoms are chronic diarrhea, abdominal cramps, bloating, and fatigue. "Also," she says, "the park signs about Giardia are probably posted because the organisms cannot be killed by boiling."
However, she admits that she isn't sure of her interpretation of the sign, and she agrees with Emilio that the nearby stream might not even contain Giardia, so she decides to do whatever the majority wants. She adds that the three of you might get lucky while you are hiking out and meet someone who can help, maybe a hiker who knows more about Giardia or has extra water- sterilization tablets. Then again, you might not be so lucky; you didn't pass anybody on the way in. Hiking out while you all have a bad case of Giardia might even be life threatening.
Emilio agrees to go along with the majority decision, too. He wants to stay, but not by himself. Still, he isn't convinced by Juanita's reasons. "Look," he says, "if the stream were poisonous, everything in it would look dead. There are water spiders and plants living in the stream. It's no death trap."
At this point you are faced with one of life's little decisions: What do you do about the water situation? Go or stay? Someone else might make this decision by flipping a coin. A logical reasoner is more rational.
A first step in logical reasoning is often to get some good advice. You already have some advice, but how do you decide whether it's any good? There is one best way to identify good advice: It can be backed up with good reasons. Juanita's advice to go back home is backed up by these reasons: (1) the consequences of getting giardia are pretty bad, and (2) the posted signs probably indicate that boiling won't work. Unfortunately, she is not sure about the boiling. So the burden



#####4
